The landscape is at the scale of individuals and communities, the scale at which we look to answer a set of questions at the foundation of ecology: What species are present in this space? In what numbers? And why are they present in that configuration and not some other arrangement? For answers, we go to the basics. Living organisms need energy and material resources to survive and reproduce. Describing the flow of energy and materials through a living community is one way to define an ecosystem.

The energy that fuels living systems begins as sunlight. Sunlight is transformed into energy-containing carbohydrate molecules through the process of photosynthesis. Organisms that produce complex organic substances directly from simple molecules such as CO2 and an input of energy are called autotrophs, from the Greek, auto, self, and trophe, nourishment. Nearly all of the production of autotrophs is driven by the energy in sunlight, although certain bacteria (called chemoautotrophs) use chemical resources to synthesize biomolecules without requiring sunlight.

Autotrophs, then, can nourish themselves; they don’t need a living source of energy. These algae and plants are the primary producers of the biosphere, the original generators of living matter, or biomass. Some of their production feeds a second tier of organisms, the primary consumers. These include herbivores, animals that live on bulk plant materials, and insects that harvest plant nutrients on a smaller scale—bees collecting nectar, for example, or the myriad other insects that feed on plant juices and foliage. Organisms that feed on organic materials synthesized by other organisms are called heterotrophs.

Primary consumers are just a second link in a food chain, the movement of energy as one organism feeds on another and then is eaten by yet another. So primary consumers become food for secondary consumers, and secondary consumers become food for tertiary consumers. Animals that eat other animals are called carnivores. Some carnivores eat only other animals. Others are omnivores, feeding on plants or animals as they are available.

A food chain describes the movement of energy from one organism to the next. In an ecosystem, links in a food chain often intersect: organisms share food sources and are preyed on by a variety of species higher in the food chain. These networks of interactions are called food webs.

In a food web, energy and nutrients are not just consumed but recycled. All organisms die. Decomposers feed on dead plant and animal material, breaking that material down into basic nutrients. Bacteria, fungi, and worms are nature’s cleaning crew, but they are not last in line in the food web. They too are eaten by other organisms, returning energy and nutrients to the system. Sharing in the cleanup are detritivores, which feed on dead plant and animal material, and scavengers, including many insects, birds, and mammals that feed on predators’ leavings.