Herbivory is a type of predation in which animals/organisms consume autotrophs such as plants, algae, and photosynthesizing bacteria. Herbivory is a term commonly used to describe the consuming of plants by animals. Herbivores can be divided into two main groups: monophagous and polyphagous. Monophagous herbivores are organisms that exclusively eat one plant species, and the survival of these organisms is dependent on the survival of the primary food source. Also, monophagous herbivores are immune to the plant's defenses, both mechanical and chemical. For example, the Monarch Butterfly that feeds on milkweed is immune to its toxic defenses. Other examples of monophagous herbivores are the Giant Panda whose diet consists of 99% bamboo and Koala Bears who feed on Eucalyptus leaves. Most herbivores are polyphagous and feed on more than one type of plant, but herbivores can be further divided into several sub groups which are frugivores, meaning they eat primarily fruit, folivores, which eat leaves, and nectarivores, which feed on nectar. Herbivory can occur above or below the ground. Roots and/or tubers below the ground can be consumed as well as the portion of the plant that's above the ground.  The highest rates of herbivory occurs in rainforests. High herbivory rates occur because there is an increased number of young expanding plant life in the understory of rainforests which are more acceptable to insects, pathogens, and folivorous mammals. Plant defences, evolution and diversity is constantly being driven by herbivores in order to find a means of survival. According to Coley et al. 1996[3], leaves in tropical rainforests have low nutritional quality, greater toughness, and many types of secondary metabolites in order to defend themselves from herbivores. The low nutritional value, toughness, and secondary metabolites of the leaves lengthen the development periods of herbivores, causing the herbivores to be more vulnerable to predators and parasitoids. In a study done by Kalka et al. 2008,[4], Bats were a primary insectivores that consumed many herbivorous insects.The bats significantly reduce the number of herbivorous insects and indirectly reduces herbivory. Herbivorous insects constrain plant reproduction, and the predation that the bats produce allow for the plants to once again reproduce properly.  Herbivory has an impact on the health, structure, and diversity of the plant and soil communities,as well as the productivity of important crops. There are several positive impacts of herbivory. For example, low level herbivory can remove aging roots and leaves, allowing new growth of young roots and shoots. The new roots and shoots that grow provide better nutrients for absorption and reproduction. The feces of herbivores enrich the soil, which increases the chances of successful seedling growth. Another example of a positive impact of herbivory is when ants take seeds back to their nest. Ants' nests are usually rich in nutrients and surrounded by water, which provides a favorable environment in which the plants can grow. Herbivores also prune plants, which allows for more light passage and makes it easier for seeds to fall from a parent plant.