Parasitism affects the host (prey) population in ways that are similar to predation and can be described using predation models. However, whereas predation generally involves multiple prey being killed and consumed during a predator’s lifetime, parasites exploit living prey. Parasitoidism is unique to insects, especially flies and wasps, and combines attributes of both predation and parasitism. The adult parasitoid typically deposits eggs or larvae on, in, or near multiple hosts, and the larvae subsequently feed on their living host and eventually kill it (Fig. 8.6). Parasites must be adapted to long periods of exposure to the defenses of a living host (see Chapter 3). Therefore parasitic interactions tend to be relatively specific associations between co-evolved parasites and their particular host species and may involve the modification of host morphology, physiology or behavior to benefit parasite development or transmission. Because of this specificity, parasites and parasitoids tend to be more effective than predators in responding to and controlling population irruptions of their hosts and, therefore, have been primary agents in biological control programs (Hochberg 1989). In fact, release from parasites, coupled with slow response by generalist predators, may largely explain the rapid spread of invasive plants and animals (Torchin and Mitchell 2004).

Ectoparasites feed externally, by inserting mouthparts into the host (e.g., lice, fleas, mosquitoes, ticks), and endoparasites feed internally, within the host’s body (e.g., bacteria, nematodes, bot flies and wasps). Primary parasites develop on or in a non-parasitic host, whereas hyperparasites develop on or in another parasite. Some parasites parasitize other members of the same species (autoparasitism or adelphoparasitism), as seen in the hymenopteran, Coccophagus scutellaris. The female of this species parasitizes scale insects, and the male is an obligate autoparasite of the female (van den Bosch et al. 1982). Superparasitism occurs when more individuals occupy a host than can develop to maturity. Multiple parasitism occurs when more than one parasite species is present in the host simultaneously. In most cases of superparasitism and multiple parasitism, one dominant individual competitively suppresses others and develops to maturity. In a special case of multiple parasitism, some parasites preferentially attack hosts parasitized by other species (cleptoparasitism). The cleptoparasite is not a hyperparasite, but typically kills and consumes the original parasite as well as the host.