Sea Ice Deformation in a Coupled Ocean-Sea Ice Model and in Satellite Remote Sensing Data

A realistic representation of sea ice deformation in models is important for accurate simulation of the sea ice mass balance. In this study, model ice strength sensitivity experiments show an increase in Arctic Basin sea ice volume of 7 % and 35 % for a decrease in ice strength of, respectively, 30 % and 70 %, after 8 years of model integration. This volume increase is caused by a combination of dynamic and thermodynamic processes. On the one hand, a weaker ice cover initially produces more ice due to increased deformation and new ice growth. The thickening of the ice, on the other hand, increases the ice strength and decreases the sea ice volume export out of the Arctic Basin. The balance of these processes leads to a new equilibrium Arctic Basin ice volume. Simulated sea ice deformation strain rates from model simulations with 4.5, 9, and 18-km horizontal grid spacing are compared with synthetic aperture radar satellite observations (RGPS). All three model simulations can reproduce the large-scale ice deformation patterns but they do not reproduce all aspects of the observed deformation rates. The overall sea ice deformation rate is about 50 % lower in all model solutions than in the satellite observations, especially in the seasonal sea ice zone. Small scale sea ice deformation and linear kinematic features are not adequately reproduced. A decrease in model grid spacing, however, produces a higher density and more localized ice deformation features. Overall, the 4.5-km simulation produces the lowest misfits in divergence, vorticity, and shear when compared with RGPS data. Not addressed in this study is whether the differences between simulated and observed deformation rates are an intrinsic limitation of the viscous-plastic sea ice rheology that was used in the sensitivity experiments, or whether it indicates a lack of adjustment of existing model parameters to better represent these processes. Either way, this study provides new quantitative metrics for existing and new sea ice rheologies to strive for.

